---
layout:   post
title:    "Front-end Architecture Patterns: Quil"
date:     2018-02-01 06:30:00 +0100
category: architecture
tags:     ["software development", "software architecture", "design patterns", "architecture patterns", "Quil", "Clojure", "ClojureScript", "drawing", "animation", "Processing", "Processing.JS"]
---

# Front-end Architecture Patterns: Quil

[Quil](http://quil.info/) is a Clojure and ClojureScript graphics library that can compile to both Java bytecode (Clojure) and JavaScript (ClojureScript).

Quil is a wrapper over [Processing](https://processing.org/) in Clojure and [Processing.js](http://processingjs.org) in ClojureScript. These technologies use OpenGL (Processing/Quil in Clojure) or the HTML canvas element (Processing.js/Quil in ClojureScript).

Quil can operate in a regular mode, where state is usually stored using global atoms, or a "functional mode" - where state is passed as arguments. Read more about the [Quil API](http://quil.info/api) on Quil's website.


# The defsketch macro

Quil's main function (actually, a macro) is `defsketch` which defines a "sketch" &mdash; a 2D or 3D drawing or animation. This macro starts execution as soon as the code read, use `sketch` instead to dynamically call a sketch from a function.

The most common/important options to the `defsketch` and `sketch` macros are:

- __`:draw`__   tells Quil which function draws the sketch
- __`:setup`__  tells Quil which function to run (once) before drawing begins
- __`:update`__ tells Quil how to update state before displaying it

As well as:

- __`:size`__ a vector containing the width and height of the sketch &mdash; defaults to 500x300
- __`:host`__ (ClojureScript) - the ID of the canvas element to display the sketch in.

Additionally, the `:title` option is supposed to set the name of the window (Clojure), but this has never worked for me &mdash; it always just says "Applet". If I am doing something wrong, please let me know in the comments!

If you are only defining a static (non-animated) drawing, the `:setup` and `:update` options are not required, the function indicated by `:draw` is called once to describe the sketch.


# Regular Quil animation

When creating animations with Quil, state is held in globally declared atoms. The setup, update and are not expected to neither accept nor return values. Each drawing in the animation is known as a frame.

First, the setup function is called first, then the draw function. The update and draw are then called repeatedly, once for each frame.

During regular operation, Quil does not expect these functions to accept or return values.


## Setup

- The function given to the `:setup` option in the `defsketch` (or `sketch`) macro configures all default values for the sketch
- A frame rate must be set for the animation to (attempt) to run at, and is expressed in frames per second (fps)
- It is expected that state is initialised in the setup function
- The setup function is called only once by Quil
  - It may be called again if you wish to reset everything, but Quil will not do this for you


## Update

- The function given to the `:update` option to the `defsketch` (or `sketch`) macro
- This function is expected to update the state ready for the next frame to be drawn
- Called once every frame cycle, before the draw function


## Draw

- The function given to the `:draw` option to the `defsketch` (or `sketch`) macro
- This function is expected to draw the state into each frame
- Called once every frame cycle, after the update function


## Events

Events, such as keyboard and mouse interactions, can also be handled by Quil. See the documentation for more details. The snake game and modulo multiplication sketches in the [drawing repository](https://github.com/Zsuark/drawing) demonstrate use of events (in functional mode).


# Functional mode

If you supply the `fun-mode` middleware to the `defsketch` or `sketch` macros, Quil will operate in a more pure functional way. You may read more about the [functional mode on the Quil wiki](https://github.com/quil/quil/wiki/Functional-mode-%28fun-mode%29).

The main difference between the functional mode and regular operation is that state is not bound to global names, but passed and returned as a single value from the appropriate functions. Usually the state is contained in a hashmap or other convenient data structure.

## Setup

- Does initial required side-effects
- Expects no parameters
- Returns the initial state

## Update

- Takes the existing state as a parameter
- Does the required transformations and returns the new state

## Draw

- Takes state as a parameter
- Performs required side-effects to translate the state into a frame
- No return value is expected

## Events

Event handling functions:

- Take the existing state and the event as parameters
- Return a new version of the state with the effects of the event applied (if appropriate)
- The event is described in a hashmap

The snake game and modulo multiplication sketches in the [drawing repository](https://github.com/Zsuark/drawing) demonstrate use of events in functional mode.


# That is all...

...for now. Enjoy this game of snake made in functional mode Quil. The JavaScript included on this page, was compiled from the ClojureScript version &mdash; available in the [snake-cljs branch of the drawing repository](https://github.com/Zsuark/drawing/tree/snake-cljs).

{% include snake.html %}

Use the arrow keys to control the snake. The canvas element needs focus, so __click on game if the controls aren't working__.


As always, __feel free to comment__. See you next week &mdash; if not before!

